The Adventure of the Three Students

Holmes and Watson are staying in a university town where Holmes is doing research into early English charters, when Professor Hilton Soames, a lecturer at the College of St Luke's, brings a case to the detective, relying on his discretion.

Soames had been reviewing galleys of a passage of Greek that was to be translated during an examination for the important Fortescue Scholarship. He left his study and when he returned he found that Bannister, his servant, had left the keys in the lock, and that the papers had disturbed in such a way as to make it clear that the passage had been at least partially copied. The thief left clues such as shavings from a pencil, a cut in the leather surface of the desk, and a small ball of black stuff. Inspecting the lecturer's bedroom, Holmes finds another ball of dough, and deduces that that is where the thief hid when he heard Soames coming back.

Three students, scheduled to take the examination, live above the study, and any of them could have seen the keys when using the staircase and be tempted to copy the galleys. Gilchrist is an excellent student and an athlete, Ras is a serious and peaceful Indian fellow, and McLaren is brilliant, but lazy and dissipated. Holmes visits them to check their pencils and their heights.

The next day, as they head back to the college, the detective tells Watson he has solved the mystery. He asks Soames to fetch Gilchrist and accuses him in Bannister's presence. The young man falls apart as Holmes explain what happened. He is tall enough to have seen the papers on the desk as he passed the window when coming back from athletic training holding his muddy shoes. Climbing the stairs, he saw the keys in the lock and couldn't resist the temptation to enter and copy the translation. When he heard Soames come back, he hid in the bedroom. Then Bannister, who had known Gilchrist since his childhood, helped him to escape, convinced the young man that he could not benefit from his actions. Gilchrist had already decided not to take part in the examination and to leave to take a commission in the Rhodesian Police.